---
title: Continuous Random variables
author: JSH
date: 2024-07-12 10:01:00 +0800
categories: [Study, Statistics]
tags: [Study, Statistics, IMS]
use_math: true
---

# Continuous Random Variables

## Continuous Distribution
If the measurements could come from an interval of possible outcomes, we call them data from a continuous-type population or continuous-type data

### Histogram
A histogram is a graphical display of tabular frequencies, shown as adjacent rectangles.
We assume that a simple of $n$ observations, $x_1, \ldots, x_n$, from a distribution are observed.
If we have cutpoints for class intervals: $(c_0, c_1), (c_1, c_2), (c_2, c_3), \ldots, (c_{k-1}, c_k)$, then each rectangle has an area equal to the relative frequency $\frac{f_i}{n}$ of the observations for the class.
That is, the function is defined by $h(x) = \frac{f_i}{n(c_i - c_{i-1}}$, for $c_i < x < c_i, i = 1, \ldots, k$.

With a sample size of $n \geq 30$, the histogram is an adequate estimate of the distribution $p(y)$ that produced your data.
Larger $n$ provides better accuracy.

### Empirical rule
We assume that a sample of $n$ observations, $x_1, \ldots, x_n$ from a distribution are observed.

If we let $\overline{x}$ and $s$ be a sample mean and a sample standard deviation respectively, and the histogram of these datais bell shaped, then
* Approximately 68% of the data are in the interval $(\overline{x} - s, \overline{x} + s)$
* Approximately 95% of the data are in the interval $(\overline{x} - 2s, \overline{x} + 2s)$
* Approximately 99.7% of the data are in the interval $(\overline{x} - 3s, \overline{x} + 3s)$

### Stem-and-leaf display
If the leaves are carefully aligned vertically, the table has the same effect as a histogram, but the original numbers are not lost

### Order statistics
For a sample of $n$ observations $(x_1, \ldots, $x_n)$, when the observations are ordered from small to large, the resulting ordered data are called the order statistics.
The smallest observation is called the first order statistics and the $i$th smallest observation is called the $i$th order statistics.

### (100$p$)th sample percentile (= sample quantile of order $p$)
If $(n+1)p$ is not an integer but is equal to $r$ plus some proper fraction, $a/b$, the (100$p$)th sample percentile is $y_r + (a/b)(y_{r+1} - y_r) = (1 - a/b)y_r + (a/b)y_{r+1}$ where $n$ is the number of sample and $y_r$ is the $r$th order statistics.

With a sample size $n \geq 30$, the quantiles are adquate estimates, making qq plot reasonably trustworthy.
Larger $n$ provides better accuracy.

### If there are $n$ observations and $y_r$ indicates the $r$th order statistics,
* Midrange: $0.5(y_1 + y_n)$
* Trimean: 0.25(1st quartile) + 0.5(2nd quartile) + 0.25(3rd quartile)
* Range: $y_n - y_1$
* Interquartile range (IQR): (3rd quartile) - (1st quartile)

### (100$p$)th percentiles of a population (= a population quantile  of order $p$)
(100$p$)th percentile is a number $\pi_p$ such that the area under $f(x)$ to the left of $\pi_p$ is $p$.
The $r$th order statistic, $y_r$, from $n$ measurements is the quantile of order $r/(n+1)$ as well as the $100r/(n+1)$th percentile.

### Quantile-quantile plot (QQ plot)
We assume that there are $n$ measurements from some distribution.
If we let the $r$th order statistics by $y_r$ and $p = r/(n+1)$, the plot of $(\pi_p, y_r)$ for several values of $r$ is called the q-q plot

#### Interpreting quantile-quantile plot
* Compare the data to the straight line. The closer they are to the line, the more they appear as if produced by the assumed model
* Data points higher than the line in the upper right suggest that the pdf that produced the data tends to give more extreme values in the upper tail than does the assumed distribution
* Data points lower than the line in the upper right suggest that the pdf that produced the data tends to give less extreme values in the upper tail than does the assumed distribution
* Pronounced horizontal lines are evidence of discreteness


## Properties of pdfs
* $0 \leq f_X(x), -\infty < x < \infty$
* $\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f_X(x) dx = 1$
* $P(a < X \leq b) = \int_a^b f_X(x) dx$
* $P(a < X \leq b) = P(a < X < b) = P(a \leq X < b) = P(a \leq X \leq b)$


