---
title: Introduction to Genetics
author: JSH
date: 2025-09-23 10:03:00 +0800
categories: [Study, Genetics]
tags: [Study, Genetics, EOG]
use_math: true
---

# Introduction to Genetics
## Genetics Progressed from Mendel to DNA in Less Than a Century

### The Chromosome Theory of Inheritance: Uniting Mendel and Meiosis

Chromosomes in diploid (2n) cells exist in pairs, called homologous chromosomes.

In mitosis, chromosomes are copied and distributed so that each daughter cell receive a diploid set of chromoomes identical to those in the parental cell.

Meiosis is associated with gamete formation.
Cells produced by meiosis receive only one chromosome from each chromosome pair, and the resulting number of chromosomes is called the haploid number (n).

The chromosome theory of inheritance explains how genetic infomration is transmitted from generation to generation.

### Genetic Variation

Mutations are any heritable change in the DNA sequence and are the source of all genetic variation.

Allele are defined as alternative forms of a gene.
Different alleles may produce differences in the observable features, or phenotype, of an organism.

The se of alleles for a given trait carried by an organism is called the genotype.

## Discovery of the Double Helix Launched the Era of Molecular Genetics

### The Structure of DNA and RNA

In DNA, there are four different nucleotides, each of which contains a nitrogenous base, A (adenine), G (guanine), T (thymine), or C (cytosine).

The two strands of DNA are exact complements of one another, so that the rungs of the ladder in the double helix always consist of A-T and G-C base pairs.

RNA is generally a single-stranded modlecule.

### Gene Expression: From DNA to Phenotype
Transcription: The nucleotide sequence in one strand of DNA is used to construct a complementary RNA sequence.

Once an RNA molecule is produced, it moves to the cytoplasm, where the RNA (messenger RNA; mRNA) binds to a ribosome.

Translation: The synthesis of proteins under the directin of mRNA.

The information encoded in mRNA (genetic code) consists of a linear series of nucleotide triplets (codon).

Proteins are polymers made up of amino acide monomers.
Protein assembly is accomplished with the aid of adapter molecules called transfer RNA (tRNA).

### Proteins and Biological Function
Proteins are molecules with the potential for enourmous structural diversity and serve as a mainstay of biological systems.

Enzyms from the largest category of proteins.
These molecules serve as biological catalysts, lowering the energy of activation in reactions and allowing cellular metabolism to proceed at body temperature.

### Linking Genotype to Phenotype
When mutation alters a gene, it may modify or even eliminate the encoded protein's usual function and cause an altered phenotype.

### Development of Recombinant DNA Technology Began the Era of DNA Cloning
Restriction enzymes are used by bacteria to cut and inactivate the DNA of invading viruses, and it could be used to cut any organism's DNA at specific nucleotide sequences, producing a reproducible set of fragments.

Researchers discovered ways to insert the DNA fragments produced by the action of restriction enzymes into carrier DNA molecules called vectors to form recombinant DNA molecules.
When transferred into bacterial cells, thousands of copies, or clones, of the combined vector and DNA fragments are produced during bacterial reproduction.

Collections of clones that represent an organism's genome, defined as the complete haploid DNA content of a specific organism, are called genomic libraries.

## Genomics, Proeteomics, and Bioinformatics Are New and Expanding Fields

Genomics studies the structure, function and evolution of genes and genomes.
Proteomics identifies the set of proteins present in a cell under a given set of conditions, and studies their functions and interactions.

### Modern Approaches to Understanding Gene Function
In reverse genetics, the DNA sequence for a particular gene of interest is known, but the role and function of the gene are typically not well understood.
For example, molecular biology techniques such as gene knockout render targeted genes nonfunctional in a model organism or in cultured cells.
After making a knockout organism, scientists look for both apparent phenotype changes, as well as those at the cellular and molecular level.






