---
title: Mitosis and Meiosis
author: JSH
date: 2025-10-28 8:03:00 +0800
categories: [Study, Genetics]
tags: [Study, Genetics, EOG]
use_math: true
---

# Mitosis and Meiosis
An organism's DNA, with its arrays of genes, is organized into structures called chromosomes, which serve as vehicles for transmitting genetic information.

Two major processes are involved in the genetic continuity of nucleated cells: mitosis and meiosis.
Mitosis leads to the production of two cells, each with the same number of chromosomes as the parent cell.
In contrast, meiosis reduces the genetic content and the number of chromosomes by precisely half.
This reduction is essential if sexual reproduction is to occur without doubling the amount of genetic material in each new generation.
Meiosis is part of a speccial type of cell division that leads to the production of sex cells: gametes or spores.
This process is an essential step in the transmission of genetic information from an organism to its offspring.

Normally, chromosomes are visible only during mitosis and meiosis.
When cells are not undergoing division, the genetic material making up chromosomes unfolds and uncoils into a diffuse network within the nucleus, generally referred to as chromatin.

## Cell structure is closely tied to genetic function
### Plasma membrane
An outer covering that defines the cell boundary and delimits the cell from its immediate external environment. It actively controls the movement of materials into and out of the cell
* Glycocalx: cell coat. It has a chemical composition that differs from comparable structures in either plants or bacteria. It also provide biochemical identity at the surface of cells, and the components of the coat that establish cellular identity are under control.
* Histocompatibility antigens: elicit an immune response during tissue and organ transplants
* Receptor molecules: recognition sites that transfer specific chemical signals across the cell membrane into the cell
* Cell wall: outer covering that palnt cells have. Its major component is a plysaccharide called cellulose

### Nucleus
The presence of a nucleus and other membranous organelles is the defining characteristic of eukaryotes.

The nucleus is a membrane-bound structure that houses the genetic material, DNA.
* Nucleolus: an amorphous component where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is synthesized and where the initial stages of ribosomal assembly occur.
  * The portions of DNA that encode rRNA are collectively referred to as the nucleolus organizer region (NOR)

### Nucleoid
In eubacteria, the genetic material is present as a long, circular DNA molecule that is compacted into an unenclosed region called the nucleoid.

### Cytoplasm
The eukaryotic cell within the plasma membrane, excluding the nucleus, is referred to as cytoplasm and includes a varietly of extranuclear cellular organelles.
* Cytosol: nonparticular, colloidal material surrounds and encompasses the cellular organelles
* Cytoskeleton
  * Microtubules: made of the protein tubulin
  * Microfilaments: derive from the protein actin
  * maintaining cell shape, facilitates cell mobility, and anchours the various organelles

### Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
Increasing the surface area available for biochemical synthesis.

ER appears smooth in places where it serves as the site for synthesizing fatty acids and phospholipids.
In other places, it appears rough because it is studded with ribosomes.

### Ribosome
Site where genetic information contained in messenger RNA (mRNA) is translated into proteins.

### Mitochondria
The sites of the oxidative phases of cell respiration, generating large amounts of the energy-rich molecule adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
It contains DNA in a form distinct from that found in the nucleus.

### Chloroplasts
It found in plants, algae, and some protozoans, associated with photosynthesis.
It contains DNA in a form distinct from that found in the nucleus.

### Centrioles
These cytoplasmic bodies, each located in a specialized region called the centrosome, are associated with the organization of spindle fibers that function in mitosis and meiosis.

The organization of spindle fibers by the centrioles occurs during the early phases of mitosis and meiosis.
This fibers play an important role in the movement of chromosomes as they separate during cell division.




